ErbTeX: Ruby pre-processing for TeX and LaTeX Documents
==========

# Description

erbtex is a ruby gem that provides a command line program the
pre-processes TeX and LaTeX source files with ruby's erubis and then
passes the resulting file along to a real TeX program.

# Installation
Install it with:
    gem install erbtex

# Usage

After the gem is installed, erbtex is placed in your PATH in front of
the real TeX and LaTeX programs, along with links to erbtex having the
names pdftex, pdflatex, luatex, and several other TeX processing
programs.  Thus, invoking, for example, `pdflatex` runs `erbtex`
instead of the real `pdflatex` program.

It will then read the input file and execute any ruby code between the
special markers markers `.{` and `}.`.  It will then find the real
program further along your path and run it on the pre-processed
output.  The result is that you can use the ruby programming language
to greatly increase the computational capabilities of a normal TeX or
LaTeX file.

erbtex simply uses the `erubis` program to pre-process the input,
except that it uses the `.{ }.` delimiters instead of the erubis
  default of `<% %>`.  The dot-brace form of delimiters is less
  disruptive of syntax highlighting than the default delimiters, which
  get confused with TeX and LaTeX comments.

  If the opening delimiter has an `=` appended to it, the contained
  expression is converted into a string and inserted in-place into the
  TeX manuscript at that point.  Without the `=` the code is simply
  executed.  Loops started in one ruby fragment can be continued or
  terminated in a later fragment, and variables defined in one
  fragment in one fragment are visible in later fragments according
  to Ruby's usual scoping rules.

# Example

For example, the following LaTeX file will produce a table of square
roots when run through erbtex.  It uses a ruby iterator to supply the
rows of the table, a feat that would tedious at best with bare TeX or
LaTeX.

    \documentclass{article}
    \usepackage[mathbf]{euler}
    \usepackage{longtable}

    \begin{document}
        \begin{longtable}[c]{r|r}
    \hline\hline
    \multicolumn{1}{c|}{\mathversion{bold}$x$}&
    \multicolumn{1}{c}{\mathversion{bold}\rule{0pt}{12pt}$\sqrt{x}$}\\
    \hline\hline
    \endhead
    \hline\hline
    \endfoot
    .{0.upto(100).each do |x| }.
      .{= "\\mathversion{bold}$%0.4f$" % x }.&
      .{= "$%0.8f$" % Math.sqrt(x) }.\\
    .{end}.
    \end{longtable}
    \end{document}

With the above in file `roots.tex`, running `$ pdflatex roots.tex` at
the command line will generate a `PDF` file with a nicely typeset
table of square roots.

As a by-product, the pre-processed file `roots.etx` is left in the
same directory, so you can see what the effect of the erbtex fragments
were.  This is often very handy when you are trying to debug the
document; otherwise, it can be deleted.  Here, for example is a
portion of the `roots.etx` file generated by the foregoing:

    \begin{document}
      \begin{longtable}[c]{r|r}
      \hline\hline
      \multicolumn{1}{c|}{\mathversion{bold}$x$}&
      \multicolumn{1}{c}{\mathversion{bold}\rule{0pt}{12pt}$\sqrt{x}$}\\
      \hline\hline
      \endhead
      \hline\hline
      \endfoot
      \mathversion{bold}$0.0000$&
      $0.00000000$\\
      \mathversion{bold}$1.0000$&
      $1.00000000$\\
      \mathversion{bold}$2.0000$&
      $1.41421356$\\
      \mathversion{bold}$3.0000$&
      $1.73205081$\\
      \mathversion{bold}$4.0000$&
      $2.00000000$\\
      \mathversion{bold}$5.0000$&
      $2.23606798$\\
      \mathversion{bold}$6.0000$&
      $2.44948974$\\
      \mathversion{bold}$7.0000$&
      $2.64575131$\\
      \mathversion{bold}$8.0000$&
      $2.82842712$\\
      \mathversion{bold}$9.0000$&
      $3.00000000$\\
      \mathversion{bold}$10.0000$&
      $3.16227766$\\
      \mathversion{bold}$11.0000$&
      $3.31662479$\\
      \mathversion{bold}$12.0000$&
      $3.46410162$\\
      \mathversion{bold}$13.0000$&
      $3.60555128$\\
      \mathversion{bold}$14.0000$&

And many more lines like it.

The examples directory installed with the erbtex gem has a few more
examples.
